Section 5.1: From dada to conceptual art

By objects in transition I mean those various artefacts that tend to evade inclusion among the established genres and media of art, that thus effect a degree of transition between categories or that may seem to change status and value according to the cultural perspective from which they are viewed. This may be because they have so far extended the normal bound­ aries of genres and media as to invite re-categorisation, or because they belong to categories that for one reason or another invite reconsideration and revaluation as kinds of art. In this first section I am concerned with the activities of modern artists, those working self-consciously within a tradition of fine art but tending to avoid the media of painting and sculp­ ture. The avoidance may be strategic, as a means of circumventing the associations these media have with particular cultures and value systems; it may alternatively follow from a sense that the potentials of both painting and sculpture are exhausted and that there is therefore an imperative to work in some other fashion; or it may be due to a combination of these factors. To talk of transitional objects is in a sense to imply a movement away from the established categories of fine art and thus to associate them with opposition to a status quo. The transitional objects produced during much of the twentieth century were intentionally oppositional in this sense. It could be said of the early twenty-first century, however, that it is the transitional objects themselves - the quirky Surrealist objects, the artists' videos, the performances, even the curators' shows-as-artworks - that have come to occupy centre stage.

The category of fine art as I have applied it is to a large extent the con­ tingent product of western modes of specialisation and of a self-conscious history of art that first emerged in Italy in the sixteenth century, at a time when the social and intellectual status of the artist was rising. From that point on painting was increasingly promoted as the visual art form that promised a depth and range of content comparable with the established genres of literature, while sculpture was bolstered both by its grounding in the classical cultures of Greece and Rome and by its potential for public commemoration and display. The gradual separation of 'art' from 'craft', and the elevation of the former over the latter, gained impetus from the Romantic promotion of the artist as an exceptional individual - a kind of free spirit or genius, whose insights are of value not only because they are unconstrained by practical and utilitarian considerations but also because they defy or exceed the ordinary. During the early part of the twentieth century both painting and sculpture came to be widely seen as paradigmatically modernist art forms, the one secured in its autonomy by the ten­ dency to abstraction that cut the medium loose from any explicit reference to other things in the world, the other achieving the isolation that Baudelaire had foretold by briefly abandoning its association with the architectural and the monumental, establishing its identity rather through a 'life' internal to its processes and materials.

Yet the modernist affirmation of painting's and sculpture's central status was open to challenge in two principal phases. The first was when a dissenting Dadaist faction emerged within the early twentieth-century avant-garde. ('Avant-garde' was originally taken from French military terminology. When applied to the discussion of art and culture it refers to a group of individuals working at the most forward point of development in new techniques and modes of expression. Use of the term tends to imply that there is a degree of common ground between technical innovation and political radicalism. ) The second phase came at a point in the 1 9 6os when modernism was centrally identified with American modes of abstract art and with their critical support, when there was widespread opposition to American conduct of the war in Vietnam and when modernism itself came to be identified by many as the failing critical apparatus of an oppressive cultural and material power. Until that point modernism in art had generally been associated with dissent from a prevailing social and moral order. This idea had its origins in the Romanticism of the late eighteenth century and was at the heart of Gustave Courbet's Realist painting in the mid-nineteenth. At that time, however, in so far as dissent was a kind of content recoverable from the relevant artistic work, it was in terms of its style and subject matter. The radicalism of Courbet and later of Manet lay largely in their use of established genres to introduce kinds of content and effect that were troubling to the business-as-normal of art appreciation at the time. This process left the more basic distinctions between the principal artistic media mainly intact: a painting was a painting and a sculpture a sculpture and so on. In the wake of Cubism, however, modernist art in the west tended to separate into a traditional and a radical strain, the former pursuing a range of both abstract and figurative styles in sculpture and in easel painting, the latter distinguished not simply in terms of its more pronounced opposition to the culture of the dominant order but by its sceptical attitude to art's traditional technical categories.

The artists involved with Constructivism and the European Modern Movement were generally radical in their approach to technique and par­ ticularly in Russia tended to see easel painting as a redundant medium. Except where Fascism prevailed, however, they were not dissenters from the governing social order. Rather they identified with the Revolution in Russia and looked to an expected spread of socialism beyond its borders. Their assumption was that a coming new world would require new modes of expression. There were others, though, who responded in a more pes­ simistic spirit to the events of the First World War and to the widespread repression that actually greeted the revolutionary movements in western Europe. Under the name of Dada, a number of artists and writers gath­ ered first in Zurich, then in Berlin, Cologne, New York and Paris, less con­ cerned to inject an aesthetic content into social reorganisation than to address the violence and absurdity of the bourgeois regimes and military castes they held accountable for the war. Where the artists of the Modern Movement may have seen painting and sculpture as rightly subsumed into the progressive schemes of design and architecture, the strategies of the Dadas were those of negation: if art was sup-

posed to be ordered, rational and deliberate, they would promote disorder, irrationality and ran­ domness; in place of the traditional media of painting and sculpture they offered montages, assemblages of one kind or another, and every­ day objects rendered bizarre or menacing (pl.

2 3 8 ) or simply left untransformed in the manner of Duchamp's ready-mades (see pl. 2 5 ) .

Dada's fascination with the potentially subver­ sive power of assemblages and domestic objects was carried forward into the Surrealist movement during the 1 9 20s and 30s, with some of the same artists involved and with Andre Breton as princi­ pal theorist. In so far as there was a coherent theory that sustained the movement, it was pro­ duced by combining aspects of Karl Marx's cri­ tique of capitalism with Sigmund Freud's account of the unconscious. What followed was a diag­ nosis of bourgeois society as doubly repressive, not only of the lives and potential of those it exploits but also of its own buried fears, fantasies and desires. It is in acts of censorship that this repressive character is most nakedly revealed. The avowed aim of the Surrealist artists and writers was to work at the limits of the acceptable, to haunt the culture of the status quo with the evidence of its own suppressed material and by this means to effect a 'revolution in consciousness' (the phrase is Salvador Dalf's) .

Various strategies were adopted to subvert the control of the conscious mind over the generation and ordering of material, including sleep depri­ vation, starvation and the use of narcotics. Randomising procedures were employed to frustrate normal processes of composition. One of the Sur­ realists' favoured devices was to set up improbable j uxtapositions, by using techniques derived from collage to create images suggestive of the content of dreams. While many of their best-known works are paintings, an ade­ quate survey of the movement would pay at least as much attention to the practice of combining disparate materials into pseudo-primitive fetishes for an over-sophisticated world (pl. 2 3 9 ), to the collection of found or altered objects and to the contribution made by artists associated with the movement to developments in still photography and film, both directly through their own work in photographic media and indirectly through generation of an exploitable imagery for dreaming and the unconscious (pl. 240). The influence of the movement has been massive and persisting. That influence has not necessarily been to the benefit of subsequent devel­ opments, however. While the idea of working at the limits of the accept­ able has persisted as a kind of avant-gardist fixation, the resulting enterprises have all too often been rendered bathetic by the lack of any substantial resistance in legal, social or political terms.

In section 1 . 5 I mentioned that renewed interest in Duchamp's work was shown by certain artists during the r 9 5 0s and r 9 6os. The latter decade also saw increased scepticism regarding the continuing viability of paint­ ing, pronounced on the part of a new international avant-garde and notice­ able even among the adherents to a weakening strain of traditional modernism. Sculpture seemed to have a slightly longer lease of life as a modernist medium but only by virtue of a considerable expansion in the kinds of objects that the term was used to cover. By virtue of the inescapable implication in its own physical surroundings, sculpture is open to a kind of 'networking' that painting generally is not. If it was still gen­ erally clear what was and was not a painting, the much more elastic cat­ egory of sculpture was extended to include a host of other artistic enterprises - from various types of installation to presentations involving real bodies and paths walked across the landscape.

By the mid- r 9 6os, art-world institutions were becoming troubled by the problems of curating 'other media' and of absorbing them into the world of fine art. Several developments during the decade testified to a great expansion in the number of categories by which works of modern art were claimed and recognised as such. In r 9 5 9 the term 'Happening' was first used by the American artist Allan Kaprow. Three years later the first fes­ tival of the international 'Fluxus' movement was staged in Germany, involving assemblages, tableaux, actions, readings, musical performances and so forth, with clear links back to the Surrealist movement. 'Perfor­ mance pieces' - intended as art rather than music or theatre - began to be explicitly so described in the late r 9 6os. The German film maker Gerry Schum produced Land Art in r 968, a compilation of works made specifi­ cally for television by artists using the landscape as a kind of medium in itself. A year later an exhibition, TV as a Creative Medium, was staged at a gallery in New York, anticipating artists' widespread use of video formats after equipment became readily accessible in the mid- r 970s. The effect that advances in computing programmes and technologies would have on artistic work during the r9 8os and r 990s was similarly antici­ pated in the exhibitions Cybernetic Serendipity, staged at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London in r 968, and Software held two years later at the Jewish Museum in New York.

What appeared at the time as the most determined assault on the pri­ ority of painting and sculpture came in the late r 96os with the advent of Conceptual Art, a movement that emerged neither from the post-war legacy of Surrealism nor from an engagement with new media but rather from a preoccupation with the inherited problems of painting and sculp­ ture themselves. In a text published in r 9 67, the American artist Sol LeWitt offered a set of guidelines for a new approach to art - one in which physical materials might be dispensed with altogether. 'In conceptual art,' he wrote, 'the idea or concept is the most important aspect of the work

.	. . What the work of art looks like isn't too important.' Much was made at the time of the idea that art had become subject to a process of 'dematerialisation'. In fact it was only in its most trivial aspects that Conceptual Art could be seen in this light - as though it were the end­ game in a gradual process of reduction that had begun with modernism. It was more to the point that the movement addressed a kind of crisis of modernism as primary material for inquiry and analysis.

So long as development in modern art was largely conceived by refer­ ence to the changing appearances of painting and sculpture, it had seemed easy enough to distinguish between a given work of art and a body of written or spoken discourse about it. The work on the wall or on the floor was the primary object of attention; an accompanying text might be 'about' the work but was not to be confused with the work itself. However, if a 'ready-made' or a 'found object' was to be singled out as a work of art, its status as such could hardly be established by examining its formal and technical characteristics alone, since these were shared with other objects that were not works of art (see pl. 2 5 ) . That status would pre­ sumably depend on the validity of a claim implied in some title, descrip­ tion or specification that was thus inseparable from the enterprise itself and that would necessarily take the form of a linguistic statement. 'I propose this as a work of art' is one of the simplest forms such a statement might take. In any critical assessment of the enterprise, that statement would come up for scrutiny. Rather than questions of whether

or not arrangements of forms and colours were pleasing to the eye, the work of criticism would be to consider the implications of considering x as a work of art.

In common with the institutional theory of art discussed in section r . 5 , the position represented here is one that recognises the inadequacy of any means of defining art which is dependent on visual discrimination or emo­ tional response alone . It departs from that theory, however, in regarding the claim to artistic status not as one made on behalf of the work by some agency of the art world but rather as an integral and examinable compo­ nent of the work itself. In the case of Happenings, Actions and Perfor­ mances the claim to artistic status must also rest on some kind of script or definition - or at the least on exploitation of a permissive attitude towards specific kinds of real-world objects and events already established within the art world - since there could be no other secure means of distinguishing what is and is not to be seen as comprising 'the work'.

While characteristic works of Conceptual Art took linguistic form and tended to raise problems of definition and analysis, it was not in the margins of literature or of philosophy that the origins of the movement were to be found but in the tradition of fine art and in the problems encountered by anyone who wanted to maintain that tradition - and the possibility of some kind of integrity and self-sufficiency for new works of art - without being forced into technical conservatism. It is often argued that a kind of 'crisis of the object' occurred during the r 9 6os. Yet the crisis in question might more appropriately be thought of as a problem in the critical relations between 'art' and 'language' - a crisis brought on by the collapse of those protocols, symbolised in the frame and the pedestal, that had previously served to keep the two apart. It had been an item of faith in modernist criticism that theory was something by which the work of the authentic artist was explained after the fact, rather than a body of ideas that preceded or guided it. That was by no means a secure position even where painting and sculpture were concerned and it was certainly not sustainable in the face of work that had no fixed physical form. In 1 9 69 the English group Art & Language published the first issue of their journal, Art-Language. The editorial proposed that inside the framework of Conceptual Art the making of art and the making of theory might now have to be seen as indistinguishable. Rather than something primarily to be looked at, the work of art should be conceived of as something to be thought about.


During r 9 69 and 1 970 there were several major exhibitions of new art in which there was little work that could usefully be described as either painting or sculpture or that fitted comfortably into any established genre (pl. 24 r ) . A number of critics and curators (myself among them) were staging shows specifically addressed to 'Conceptual Art' or 'Concept Art' or 'Idea Art'. Certain common features could be observed. There was not much colour and there was not much stuff: no expressive brushwork on the walls, no accumulations of three-dimensional form on the floors. Instead, there were diagrams and texts, the latter varying in length from a few words to many pages. There were objects - books, pamphlets, pieces of paper - but their typical function was not so much to call attention to themselves as 'art' as to invoke the imaginary or theoretical existence of other kinds of objects, processes or events. It was to these secondary and sometimes unstable objects of thought - concepts of one kind or another

-	that the attention of those attending the gallery was directed (pl. 242 and see pls 2 7 and r 26) . The viewer or spectator had thus been trans­ formed into something rather less than a spectator or viewer and at the same time made something rather more - a reader, researcher or thinker.

It might be asked why reading a work in linguistic form should be thought of as an experience of art rather than, say, of literature. The answer, I think, is that it is clearly from artistic rather than literary traditions and concerns that such work emerges. One clear symptom of this is that Conceptual Art remains concerned with objects and phenomena and with the manner in which they are differentiated, represented and experi­ enced. What is distinctive is that the objects in question are constructed not from paint and canvas, clay or metal but from verbal descriptions. While some of these descriptions, like Lawrence Weiner's (see pl. 242), refer to objects and physical states that can be realised, others propose forms that can only be sketched out in thought (see pls 2 7 and 1 26). With the benefit of hindsight, such works may be seen as pursuing some impli­ cations of art's twentieth-century engagement with abstraction. It was perhaps inevitable that once the appearances of the world ceased to be binding on painting or sculpture, the possibi lity of an art of imagined objects would have to be confronted sooner or later.

The audience for this art faces a new demand - or perhaps it is really a traditional demand under a new aspect: that one should imagine the objects in question according to the formal constraints of the work (the rules of its game, as it were) and not merely invent them for oneself according to the promptings of personal fantasy and preference. When I referred above to the spectator becoming 'something more', what I had in mind was the kind of engagement with the work of art that has perhaps always come from meeting this demand. To recall the work introduced at the outset of this book, Rembrandt's painting of the artist in his studio invites us to imagine what might be represented in the hidden picture on which the artist is working (see pl. r ) . That act of imagination will be most rewarding if it is done in accordance with the formal structure of the paint­ ing. For example, if we follow the cue provided by the painter's outward glance we might imagine that what he is studying is a reflection of the picture we are actually seeing - in other words that the painting of the artist in the studio is the work on which he is actually engaged. Alterna­ tively, if we respond to that outward glance by adopting the answering position of an imaginary spectator, then we might imagine that it is our 'own' image - that of the sitter or model posed in the studio - that is being formed on the hidden surface. Although these are alternative imaginative scenarios, we remain in each case within the practical perimeters of the painting's represented world. I suggest that the work in textual form, such as plate r 26, both invites a similar kind of adherence to its formal struc­ ture and offers a similar degree of latitude in what may be imagined in response.

Section 5.2: The late twentieth century

As I understand it, Conceptual Art was itself a transitional movement, the outcome of a specific moment in the development of modern art and of the attempt by certain artists and others caught up in that moment to imagine a different kind of practice within the framework of fine art. As implied earlier, there are echoes of the early experimental phase of abstract art in the second decade of the twentieth century, discussed in section 2. r 2. In the earlier case, 'abstract art' was used for much of the rest of the century as a label for work that failed to exhibit traditional pictorial forms, but with no strong sense of connection to the matters that Malevich, Mon­ drian, Kandinsky and others had addressed. Since the r98os 'Conceptual Art' has similarly been adopted as the professional label for more or less any work that is not evidently painting or sculpture, with a comparable disregard for the character of the original movement and for the problems it addressed. There is particular irony in the use of the term to categorise the highly spectacular work to be seen in massive museum installations such as those staged in the Turbine Hall of Tate Modern in London, since the original Conceptual Art movement had been strongly opposed to the tendency to identify ambition in art with over-inflated spectacle and escalation in material terms (pl. 24 3 ) .

As this case suggests, where the art of the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries is concerned, we should not expect an easy consen­ sus as to which are the enterprises most deserving of attention and which the overall developments of most significance. I therefore offer two alter­ native ways in which the art of this recent period might be regarded. The first version goes as follows. A traditional form of modernist theory had tended to associate aesthetic quality with the maintenance of boundaries between media and with specialisation within those boundaries. It had also insisted on hierarchical distinctions between art and fashion, between high art and popular culture and between avant-garde art and kitsch. It had tended to deprecate all types of radical modernist practice, in the process consigning to the margins a quantity of works of art in which the inter­ ests of minorities were expressed, whether the constituencies in question were defined by sex, by class or by ethnic origin. During the late twentieth century, however, there was a significant relaxation of those constraints on artistic practices that had been associated with the privileging of paint­ ing and sculpture and with the divisive notion of 'fine art' . Over the late I 9 5os and the I 9 6os, the imagery of mass and popular culture was enthu­ siastically embraced by artists of the Pop Art movement, principally in London and New York. Subsequently, in the face of Global Conceptual­ ism (the title of a retrospective exhibition staged in New York in I 999), avant-gardism in art became clearly associated with a final breakdown of the special status accorded painting and sculpture and in due course, during the I 9 8os and I 990s, with widespread impatience with those modes of discrimination that had served to keep a culture of fine art sep­ arate from - and elevated above - the world of fashion, mass media and popular culture.

As the male-dominated painting or sculpture studio ceased to be the principal site of artistic production and as the hybridisation of artistic media became increasingly accepted, women artists became conspicuous in exploiting new technical possibilities, while members of ethnic and other minorities were able to find outlets for diverse kinds of practical work in which their distinctive concerns could be given expression. A positive con­ sequence was that the appeal of avant-garde art was extended to a new and far larger audience than it had previously enjoyed, that it appealed to a generation of dealers, entrepreneurs and collectors who were in a posi­ tion to profit from the boom economies of the time and that its curating institutions attracted sponsorship on a large scale from international busi­ nesses and brands, eager to associate themselves with the imagery of a dynamic, liberal and expansionist culture.

For the first time a significant number of women artists occupied posi­ tions at the forefront of the avant-garde. One of the success stories of the I9 8os was the recognition accorded the art of Cindy Sherman, whose work consisted of photographs of herself, variously situated, dressed, made up and posed, in each case playing out a different woman's role from an imagined narrative of modern life. The works are given the generic title of Untitled Film Stills (pl. 244 ) . Another success story was the career of the male artist Jeff Koons, whose work took the Duchampian concept of the ready-made into the territory of popular consumer goods and who with knowing and flagrant aplomb mapped out an area of common ground between high art and kitsch (pl. 246). But if there is a single career that epitomises the changed field of practice opened up to the ambitious artist by the end of the twentieth century, it is that of Damien Hirst, whose diamond-covered skull For the Love of God was sold in 2oo8, reportedly for a sum in excess of £ 5o,ooo,ooo, to an investment consortium in which the artist himself is said to have a stake (pl. 24 5 ). From a second point of view on the period the same material might be surveyed with a more sceptical regard. In this version, the demise of the authority of traditional modernism is considered in a less triumphal spirit and with less certainty about the advantages of the outcome. There can be no questioning the fact that the moment of the late 196os initiated pow­ erful liberalising tendencies in artistic practices and in their reception . Yet it does not follow that the ensuing effects have been entirely beneficial. Since that time there has been a massive expansion in the international art world and in the turnover of its various forms of business, incl uding those businesses that even publicly owned museums have now become. This expansion has certainly been facilitated by the erosion of boundaries between media and disciplines. It has led in turn to further pressure on those boundaries, whether in pursuit of new spectacular types of artistic installation or through the replacement of scholar curators by persons equipped with the supposedly broader competences of media and cultural management. However, where art is concerned there is no reason to assume that increases in sheer quantity must mean gains in aesthetic terms. Nor should we assume that the modernist distrust of commercial motiva­ tion was altogether unjustified.

Concentration on individual media, genres and disciplines normally means specialisation, whether practical or intellectual or both. Specialisa­ tion may lead to isolation, to conservatism and to the indefensible pro­ tection of critical and professional privilege. Nevertheless, it is also enabling of the development of skills and of certain kinds of depth and intensity of work. It may or may not be the case that the depth and inten­ sity traditionally associated with painting and sculpture are no longer to be achieved within the practical limits of those media. However, the case against them is not made merely by asserting their redundancy in face of a generic category of 'art' - one in which nothing counts for critical pur­ poses so much as extending the range of objects that the category can be made to include (an activity dependent as much on public relations as on artistic initiative) - and then inflating the results to gigantic scale. By the same token, it is a positive measure of vigilance in scholarship that regular and sceptical attention is paid both to the usefulness of disciplinary bound­ aries and to the mechanisms by which certain works and artists are accorded canonical status. Yet it does not follow that interdisciplinary work is never shallow, or that depreciating an artistic canon in the eyes of students and others may not be at least as damaging a means of indoctri­ nation as recommending it uncritically.

I do not mean to suggest that these two points of view are mutually exclusive. It is both normal and appropriate to approach the art of one's own time with a mixture of enthusiasm and scepticism. An important aim of this book is that it should allow readers to take pleasure in the experi­ ence of art and to feel confident in their own responses, whether the works in view are from ancient and distant cultures or from the present. But con­ fidence comes with critical ability, that is, with an informed awareness of those social, economic and other factors by which both works of art and spectators' responses are always liable to be affected.

Section 5.3: Revisions and revaluations

What remains indisputable is that throughout what came to be called the post-modernist world of art from the r 9 6os onwards there was widespread pursuit of media that evaded categorisation as painting or sculpture, whether through extension into the time-based forms previously associ­ ated with theatre, music and film, through employment of linguistic text or through deliberate involvement with techniques and materials generally associated with craft rather than art. It was not only through changes in artistic practice, however, that revisions were made in the relevant cate­ gories. Over the same period a converging tendency gathered force in the fields of art history, art criticism, artistic curatorship and cultural studies. Critical examination of the authority of established artistic disciplines and canons was variously driven by work in the Marxist intellectual tradition, by feminist scholarship, by the growth of cultural studies as an academic area and by the newly enfranchised views of the formerly colonised. As a consequence, the proliferation of various new kinds of artistic work coin­ cided with a considerable redirection of interests regarding the various objects already stored in the world's galleries and museums, with a reor­ ganisation of methods for their display and with a revision of priorities concerning new acquisitions.

This last tendency serves to introduce a second category of transitional objects - those on which this liberalisation of scholarship has caused a slightly different light to fall, in some cases introducing works known prin­ cipally to specialist curators into the context of wider debates about the making and appreciation of art. The majority of this book has been con­ cerned with those works of art from various periods and cultures that fall readily within established categories of the so-called fine arts as conceived from a modern western perspective - painting, prints and sculpture. (While in the case of sculpture I have drawn attention to the potential for confu­ sion and overlap with such things as architectural decorations, utensils, grave markers and so on, I have deliberately reduced that potential by con­ centrating on sculpture of the human figure.) For a visitor to any ency­ clopaedic museum, however, it will immediately be clear that items in these established categories compose only a proportion of the material presented to view. It will also be clear that the borders are nothing if not fuzzy between the kinds of objects that are preserved for their appeal as fine art and a host of other exhibits, such as those categorised as decorative or those collected for their value as evidence on historical, archaeological or ethnographical grounds.

There are certain art forms that are not paintings or prints or sculptures that have nevertheless been widely regarded over the centuries with the kind of concentrated aesthetic attention we associate with works of fine art. The blue-and-white porcelain produced in China from the thirteenth to the eighteen centuries is one example (pl. 247). Another is bonsai - the cultivation, shaping and tending of miniature trees - which the Japanese have long regarded as an art form, with some of its most venerable exam­ ples categorised as national treasures (pl. 248 ) Yet there are also objects and materials of different kinds that have been worked by those artisans we tend to designate as 'craftsmen' rather than 'artists' - as though craft were securely distinguishable from art and as though the achievements of art have not generally been based on craft skills. (In the west, the most accomplished studio pottery is generally designated as 'craft', while the most hapless of avant-garde installations and performances are categorised as 'art' .) Together with these there are the many and varied kinds of pro­ duction that result from work allocated to women, who for one reason or another and in many cultures and periods have generally been excluded from consideration as 'fine artists'. The second category of transitional objects, then, is one that embraces the productions of people who have not consciously been working to make works of 'fine art' according to the principal point of view from which this book is written, whether because no such hierarchical distinction has been made among the artefacts of their period or culture, because they have had other purposes in mind or because they have had no access to the appropriate training and opportunities, or all three.

It is this last varied type of transitional objects that needs finally to be acknowledged. To give an adequate account of the various types of work that would qualify is well beyond the scope of this book. I will therefore restrict myself to indicating one broad category in which items of extraordinary ingenuity, industry and appeal are to be found but which is gen­ erally excluded from consideration in western accounts of the fine arts. The category in question is textiles, a field of work that ranges over such distinct media as tapestries, carpets and embroideries, each fully deserv­ ing a substantial study to itself. The first of these is the one most likely to be referred to in western accounts of the fine arts, for two principal reasons: because the weaving of tapestries was a flourishing European industry from the late Middle Ages through the period of the Renaissance and beyond and because the products generally have a high pictorial content for which named and otherwise celebrated artists were often responsible - Raphael and Goya notable among them. For the walls of the wealthy from the Renaissance to early in the eighteenth century, tapestries formed at least as prevalent a form of decoration as paintings.

Carpets have similarly been woven in Europe since the Middle Ages but the finest examples since earliest times have been those that came from a swathe of territory across the Middle East and southern Asia, including Turkey, Persia (Iran), the Caucasus and India. While workshops were organised in courts throughout these areas, carpet weaving has also flour­ ished among nomadic and tribal groups wherever sheep have been widely grazed to provide supplies of wool. Carpets have been a major form of aesthetic product in Islamic cultures. This last observation serves to remind us that a medium that gains no place among the 'fine arts' in one culture may be central to the aesthetic world of another. The artistic work of the Muslim world is of particular significance in this context, including as it does not just the weaving of textiles but also tiling and calligraphy. (This last is considered a major art form also in China and Japan. The cursive scripts of Islamic, Chinese and Japanese cultures have in common a poten­ tial to convey expressive and pictorial content of a kind largely lacking in the letter forms that are ordinarily used in Europe and America, where 'concrete poetry' offers a poor substitute.)

Early in the seventh century the Prophet Muhammed received his reve­ lations and within the next hundred years Islam had spread through the southern Mediterranean area and up into Spain. In the latter context, during the long process of the so-called Reconquista (the Christian recov­ ery from Muslim rule), Christian and Muslim architects and craftsmen col­ laborated to create the Mudejar style, in which Islamic motifs are configured to the taste of Christian princes. Where Christianity, Hinduism and Buddhism encourage the making of religious images, Islam follows Judaism in forbidding any representations that might encourage believers to mistake the material for the divine. There is virtually no tradition of figurative sculpture associated with any Islamic culture. Where there is picture making it largely takes the form of miniature illustrations to non-religious stories (see pl . 1 0 1 ) . While Islamic texts thus remain devoid of illustration, highly accomplished Muslim artists were among those who worked on the illumination of Hindu texts in India in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.

The other main pictorial content of Islamic art is to be found in the designs of certain old Persian and Turkish carpets. Many of these include stylised representations of gardens or of mosques and are otherwise rich in symbolic motifs that have been subject to a high degree of formalisa­ tion . They cannot be read as pictures in the way that most European tapes­ tries can, however, being generally organised as flat patterns without spatial depth (pl. 249 ) . As though to compensate for this absence of engagement with the dominant representational art forms, types of work that in western cultures tend to be relegated to the subsidiary status of decorative arts and furnishings are invested in Islamic cultures with qual­ ities easily equal to those of the most demanding figurative art. In the case of carpets, these resul t from the richness of the vegetable dyes, from the continuous skilful care and imaginative concentration of the weavers and from the ways in which invention and improvisation are schooled by particular traditions.

Tapestries and embroideries are easi ly confused. One of the best known of all embroideries is the so-called Bayeux Tapestry, which is actually not a tapestry but a series of long strips of linen embroidered with wool (pl. 250) . It was made, probably in England, fol lowing the Norman Con­ quest of the country in :r o66 and is now preserved in a special museum in the Normandy town of Bayeux in France. I can never divorce this work from a moment of intense frustration I experienced as an undergraduate student at a time when I was beginning a course of study on medieval art. I had arrived fresh from a tour of French Romanesque churches, in a state of enthusiasm for the sculpture I had seen, and most of all for the carv­ ings attributed to Giselbertus in Autun (see pl. 2 1 4 ) - works that have pro­ vided a kind of standard for me against which I have measured other and widely different experiences of art ever since. This was what I had expected to start working on. What my tutor required, however, was an essay on 'Historical prejudice in the Bayeux Tapestry'. Not only was I being asked to write about a work I had never seen, the requirement was that I should treat it not as art but as a piece of documentary evidence. I can still recall the sense of outrage I felt. What now seems clear in the context of this book, however, and with the benefit of long hindsight, is not how justi­ fied I was in my frustration, but rather how damaging was the polarisa­ tion by which that moment was marked. I would not seek to defend my tutor's apparent commitment to a history with no sense of art, but at least as great a fault lay in my idealisation of an art abstracted from history. If the Bayeux Tapestry is a work of art, it is art of a clearly political kind, providing illustrative justification of William's claim to the English throne.

I know that much now, though I never did see the Bayeux Tapestry. Roughly contemporary with it, however, if by no means as well known, is the marvellous embroidery on the theme of the Creation that is pre­ served in the cathedral of Gerona in Catalonia (pl. 2 5 1 ) . Were a painting of comparable, skill, subject and size to have survived from this period it would be known as one of the great masterpieces of medieval art. The ten­ dency to classify embroidery as women's work has led to the common assumption that both the Bayeux Tapestry and the Tapestry of the Cre­ ation were made by women - though probably working to designs by men. However, that assumption may simply be the product of a modern preju­ dice, fuelled by the unquestionable truth that most of all work in textiles is done by women and that, particularly for middle-class women stuck at home in eighteenth and nineteenth-century Europe and America, embroi­ dery was a common if not obligatory occupation. We do not definitely know who worked on either of these two early medieval embroideries, though there are motifs in the Creation tapestry to suggest that it was the work of craftworkers with Jewish cultural experience. What we can say of both is that they would certainly have required organisation and col­ laboration among considerable communities and that this was work in which women may well have played a major role.


It is more to the point that the developments in art-historical study that have been made since the r 9 6os have led to an increased emphasis on inquiries of two related kinds: on the one hand into assumptions about the authorship of works of art and into the widespread tendency to sub­ ordinate work by women; on the other into the sometimes disadvanta­ geous effects of treating traditions of painting and sculpture as central to the definition and valuation of artistic work in general. I mentioned that there has been a coincidence since the r96os between the exploration of new media in avant-garde artistic work and the growth of revisionist ten­ dencies in art history and cultural studies. Symptoms of this coincidence are prevalent in art from that time to the present. There are artists from formerly colonial backgrounds working in the transatlantic avant-garde who employ techniques and materials associated with the cultures they or their parents have left behind, often with ironic intent (pl. 2 5 2) . And there are women artists with evident high -art ambitions who employ traditional types of 'women's work', such as embroidery, so as to establish a critical distance from the norms of painting and sculpture (pl. 2 5 3 ) . Such types of work testify to a widespread relaxation in the technical categories and demands associated with the concept of art - a relaxation initiated in the early twentieth century and gathering pace rapidly after the 1960s. As I have suggested, that relaxation brought commercial advantage. In the first years of the twenty-first century the mushrooming art fairs of an expanding globalised art world conducted a brisk trade in would-be avant­ garde work of all kinds. Yet, as I have also observed, there are now more paintings to be seen in more galleries throughout the world than at any previous period of history. As to sculpture, in so far as the traditional tech­ niques of carving and modelling are in evidence in the kinds of work that are promoted as avant-garde, it is because artists such as Jeff Koons, Louise Bourgeois and Marc Quinn have been able to employ craftsmen and women trained in commercial forms of vernacular and classical tra­ ditions. Even when such work is discounted, however, there are no doubt also more figurative sculptures in the world's commercial galleries than there have ever been before. It can be safely assumed that much of this sculpture, like the painting, is of a kind that modernist theory would dismiss as kitsch. In the highly commercialised post-modern world of art, however, such robust forms of dismissal have generally fallen from favour. The difficult and always open question is where the art is now to be found on which the traditions of the future will draw.
